Last week we looked at
a range of options for
presenting our data
visually other than charts.
This week, we're going to get
stuck into charts themselves.
Niki, what are the
objectives for this week?
This week we're going to focus on
creating the standard
charts in Excel,
but we're going to dig
a little bit deeper to
see how we get the most
out of these charts
and we're going to
focus on some of
the more advanced
techniques like dual axes,
trend lines, and combo charts.
While the videos will
focus very much on
how we go about
creating these charts,
we have to first make a decision
on which chart type
to actually use.
There's a great quote
from Cole Knaflic,
"Our tools do not know the
story we aim to tell".
How do we go about
deciding on a chart type?
Ideally, we want our
visualizations to
convey the information
at an unconscious level,
allowing our audience to extract
the information with
minimal conscious effort.
To achieve this, we
need to consider
how people actually
process information.
For example, take The
Cafe Wall Illusion.
In this image, the lines are
all horizontal and vertical,
but part of our visual
processing system
tells us that the
lines must be sloping,
even though the cognitive part of
our brain tells us
that they're not.
We don't have all the answers,
but a well-known study by
Cleveland and McGill suggests
a ranking for how accurately
people read different
visual cues.
This suggests that we more
readily interpret length and
position than volume
and intensity.
That's almost suggesting
we should only
use bar and line charts.
Very often the old
staples are the best,
but this is just one set
of factors to consider.
Before we create
our visualization,
we need to establish its purpose.
We can do this by asking
three simple questions;
Why am I creating this chart?
Who is it for? What does
it need to tell them?
The answers to these
questions should
dictate the charting
choices we make.
To help our learners,
we've included a great summary
n this week's toolbox.
Now interesting with the
Cleveland and McGill's study,
the rank of our perception of
angles is higher than
I would have expected.
There has been quite a lot of
anti-pie sentiment
in latter years,
like Stephen Few's article,
"Save the pies for dessert".
We suggest that pie charts are
not a particularly
effective visualization.
Should we be using pie charts?
As with anything, it comes
down to using it well.
Pies are often used badly,
but their native simplicity
is visually engaging.
Provided the data sets are small,
they can very effectively
demonstrate a sense
of proportion.
We are going to
look at pie charts
and the newer sexy
doughnut chart,
which does the same thing,
but it looks a bit more
modern and it does
offer us some very interesting
design opportunities.
I suppose the type of
data we are trying to
represent will also have
a large bearing on
our choice of chart.
For example, if we wanted
to show change over time,
a good option would be
to use a line chart.
Absolutely. We're going
to look at how to create
some visually compelling
line charts as well as
area charts and
stacked area charts,
which allows to show
cumulative change over time.
What about where we want to
explore relationships
in our data?
I want to see not just
sales figures over time,
but also the number of hits on
the website for the
same time frames,
to see if there's a correlation.
For that type of data,
scatter plots and
bubble charts are ideal
and that's what we'll be focusing
on in the last video this week.
Another five fantastic
videos this week,
looking at charting techniques,
Pies and Doughnuts, Line Charts,
Area Charts, and our
Scatter and Bubble Charts.
Don't forget to
download the workbook,
so you can work alone.
The practice challenge
is to cement
those skills before tackling
the assessment task,
which will assess topics
from Week 1 and Week 2.